Title: The Best Trap Bar Exercises: 16 Powerful Workouts for Full-Body Strength

----

Layout: [{"attrs":[],"columns":[{"blocks":[{"content":{"heading":"The Best Trap Bar Exercises: 16 Powerful Workouts for Full-Body Strength","description":"The Best Trap Bar Exercises: 16 Powerful Workouts for Full-Body Strength","cover":["file://rfbsbori1ni9wih5"],"body":"Looking for a simple way to train strength, power, and balance? The trap bar delivers. Also known as a hex bar, this tool is beginner-friendly and effective for lifters of all levels.\n\nTrap bar exercises let the body move in a more natural path, reducing joint stress while targeting major muscle groups.\n\nFrom deadlifts to carries, they build serious full-body strength. Research outlined in an article by Stronger by Science shows that trap bar deadlifts allow for higher velocity, greater power output, and are often safer and easier to learn than conventional barbell deadlifts.\n\nThis guide breaks down the top 16 trap bar movements to add to any routine, whether the goal is to lift heavier, move better, or stay injury-free.\n\nWhat is a Trap Bar (AKA – Hex Bar)?\nA trap bar, also known as a hex bar, is a six-sided weightlifting bar that lets the lifter stand inside the frame during exercises.\n\nUnlike a straight barbell, it positions the weight at the sides of the body. This creates a more even load and makes lifting feel more natural—especially during movements like the hex bar deadlift, which offers a safer alternative to traditional deadlifts for many lifters.\n\nThe trap bar’s design helps reduce pressure on the lower back, shoulders, and wrists. That makes it a smart option for beginners, people with joint issues, or anyone focusing on form and safety.\n\nMost trap bars come with two sets of handles—one higher and one lower—so lifters can change grip positions based on their goals.\n\nIntroduced in the 1980s by powerlifter Al Gerard, the trap bar was designed to make deadlifting safer and more accessible. Since then, the trap bar has become a gym favorite for building strength with less strain on the body.\n\nBenefits of Using a Trap Bar\nThe trap bar isn’t just a niche piece of equipment—it’s a game-changer for lifters of all levels. Its unique design opens the door to safer, more effective strength training.\n\nHere’s why it deserves a spot in your routine.\n\nBetter form with less stress: The trap bar places the weight at the sides of the body instead of in front. This helps keep the spine in a more neutral position, making it easier to maintain good form.\nReduces lower back strain: Research published in the Journal of Strength and Conditioning Research suggests that with the weight centered, there’s less forward pull on the spine—meaning less pressure on the lower back compared to traditional barbell lifts like deadlifts.\nBeginner-friendly and joint-safe: The neutral grip handles put less stress on the shoulders, wrists, and elbows. It’s a great option for beginners or anyone recovering from an injury.\nBuilds full-body strength: Trap bar lifts target the legs, glutes, back, core, and grip. That makes it a powerful tool for total-body training.\nGreat for athletes and advanced lifters: The trap bar allows for heavy lifting with a reduced injury risk. It’s perfect for training explosive power, especially in moves like jumps or loaded carries.\nA study from the Sports journal found that the trap bar deadlift leads to greater speed, power, and total work than the conventional deadlift. It also keeps the body accelerating for longer, helping one build serious strength.\n\nWhether starting out or leveling up, the trap bar brings serious value to strength training. It’s versatile, safe, and effective across fitness levels.\n\n16 Best Trap Bar Exercises\nA trap bar workout doesn’t just build strength—it builds smarter strength. From squats to carries, it helps reduce joint strain while boosting performance. Whether training for muscle, power, or stability, these exercises get results across all fitness levels.\n\n1. Trap Bar Deadlift\nStep into the bar, stand tall with feet hip-width apart, and grip the handles firmly. Keep your chest up, back flat, and core engaged. The neutral grip keeps the load centered, which helps reduce strain on the lower back.\n\nPush through the floor and finish tall with glutes locked in. It’s one of the most effective lifts for building total-body strength while keeping form simple and safe.\n\nAccording to research published in BMC Sports Science, Medicine and Rehabilitation, recreationally active females who trained with trap bar deadlifts twice a week for eight weeks significantly improved lower-body strength, power, and lean mass.\n\n2. Trap Bar Squat\nStand inside the trap bar and grip the higher handles. Keep your chest up, back flat, and core engaged as you squat straight down.\n\nThis squat variation allows for a more upright torso and less forward lean with a solid core engagement. A great way to train the legs without the added pressure of a back-loaded barbell. It’s ideal for beginners learning squat mechanics and lifters recovering from back strain.\n\n3. Trap Bar Push-Up\nGrip the handles and lower into a push-up. Because the handles are slightly elevated, you can lower your chest deeper than in a standard push-up, which increases range of motion and muscle activation.\n\nThe neutral grip puts less stress on the wrists and shoulders. Adding bumper plates increases the stability challenge, making this a great option for building control and upper-body strength.\n\n4. Trap Bar Shrug\nStand tall inside the trap bar with a heavy load. Grip the handles, brace your core, and let your arms hang naturally. Hold heavy, shrug your shoulders high, and pause briefly at the top.\n\nThe trap bar makes it easier to go heavier than dumbbells while supporting better shoulder alignment. This move strengthens the upper traps and improves posture, especially for lifters looking to carry over benefits to deadlifts.\n\n5. Trap Bar Suitcase Carry\nPick up the bar on one side and walk forward with control. This creates an offset load that challenges the core to stay upright and resist leaning. It targets grip strength, core stability, and posture—one step at a time.\n\nResearch from the National Strength and Conditioning Association suggests that loaded carries, such as the suitcase carry, enhance hip and trunk stability, contributing to improved muscular function and injury prevention.​\n\n6. Trap Bar Inverted Row\nSet the trap bar securely in a rack and pull from underneath. Adjust the bar to about waist height, then lie beneath it with your chest lined up under the handles and your heels planted firmly.\n\nThis motion trains the upper back with less stress on the joints thanks to the neutral grip. It builds pulling power and helps reinforce strong scapular control, crucial for shoulder health.\n\n7. Trap Bar Romanian Deadlift\nHinge at the hips and lower the bar while keeping the spine neutral and a slight bend in the knees. Lower only as far as you can maintain good form, typically to just below the knees or mid-shin. Focus on stretching the hamstrings and loading the glutes.\n\nSqueeze the glutes at the top to finish each rep. This movement strengthens the posterior chain and improves hip mobility, a key factor in athletic performance.\n\n8. Elevated Trap Bar Squat\nStand on bumper plates inside the trap bar to increase squat depth. Keep your torso upright and core tight as you lower down.\n\nThis variation targets the quads more directly while keeping tension off the spine and shoulders. It’s an efficient way to push leg development while keeping the movement joint-friendly.\n\n9. Trap Bar Jump Squat\nHold the trap bar with about 20% of your bodyweight. Lower into a squat, then jump explosively, and land softly. Keep the chest up and knees slightly bent on landing.\n\nThis is a powerful move for building speed, power, and lower body control without loading the spine. Great for athletes looking to improve vertical jump performance and dynamic strength.\n\n10. Trap Bar Floor Press\nLie flat on the floor with the trap bar placed above you on blocks or safety bars. Grip the neutral handles and press the bar from the floor, stopping when your upper arms contact the ground.\n\nThe limited range helps build lockout strength by targeting the triceps and upper chest. The neutral grip supports joint-friendly pressing. It’s a smart choice for lifters who want to go heavy while minimizing joint strain.\n\n11. Trap Bar Rack Pull\nStart with the bar set just below the knees. Stand inside, grip the handles, and pull to full extension by driving through the hips and locking out at the top.\n\nThis variation is great for building upper back strength and improving deadlift lockout mechanics. It also builds grip endurance and reduces the range of motion, making it easier to lift heavier loads with control.\n\n12. Trap Bar Figure-8 Carry\nGrip the handles and carry the loaded trap bar while walking in a figure-eight pattern. Keep your torso upright and your steps steady throughout the movement.\n\nThis move challenges grip, posture, and coordination in motion—especially in tight spaces. The turning pattern also forces the core to stabilize through rotation, improving athletic balance, control, and strength.\n\n13. Trap Bar Elevated Split Squat\nStand inside the trap bar and place your back foot on a bench behind you. Grip the handles, lower into a split squat, and drive through the front heel to return to standing.\n\nThis unilateral movement targets one leg at a time and forces good form with every rep. The trap bar placement keeps the center of gravity tight, which helps to keep one’s form stable and prevent tipping.\n\n14. Trap Bar Single-Leg Deadlift\nStand inside the trap bar and shift your weight onto one leg, keeping the back leg slightly behind for balance. Hinge at the hips while keeping your back flat and core tight throughout the movement. Lower the bar with control until your torso is nearly parallel to the floor, then drive through the front heel to stand tall.\n\nThis move builds strength through the hamstrings and glutes while training balance and control. The trap bar keeps the load centered, making it more stable than using dumbbells or a barbell. It’s a smart way to address left-right imbalances and build single-leg power.\n\n15. Trap Bar Tall-Kneeling Shoulder Press\nStart in a tall-kneeling position inside the trap bar with knees hip-width apart and toes flat. Grip the neutral handles, brace your core, and keep your glutes engaged to stabilize the hips. Press the bar overhead in a straight line, locking out at the top without arching the lower back.\n\nThis variation eliminates momentum from the lower body, forcing the core to work harder and building strict pressing strength. The tall-kneeling setup also reinforces proper posture and pelvic control, making it a valuable tool for developing overhead power and total-body stability.\n\n16. Trap Bar Staggered-Stance Deadlift\nStand inside the trap bar with your feet about hip-width apart, then step one foot slightly back. Keep both feet flat and a soft bend in the back knee. Brace your core, hinge at the hips, and grip the neutral handles. Most of the body weight should stay over the front leg as you drive through the heel to lift, keeping your spine neutral and shoulders engaged.\n\nThis variation helps reduce strain on the lower back while building unilateral strength and control. It’s especially effective for addressing imbalances and preparing the body for single-leg deadlifts or rehab-focused training.\n\nSample Trap Bar Workout Routine\nThis full-body trap bar workout hits all the major muscle groups and is designed to build strength, boost endurance, and improve total-body performance. The routine combines compound movements that challenge the legs, glutes, back, shoulders, and core in one session.\n\nTrain two to three times per week with at least one rest day in between for recovery.\n\nStart with light cardio followed by dynamic stretches like leg swings, arm circles, and bodyweight lunges. This warms up the muscles, improves joint mobility, and prepares the body for heavy lifting."},"id":"rxgakjhfeqymqa2m","isHidden":false,"type":"article"}],"id":"womvhfe07t2vqllu","width":"1/1"}],"id":"07dm7oqmzr9knors"}]

----

Description: The Best Trap Bar Exercises: 16 Powerful Workouts for Full-Body Strength

----

Cover: - file://rfbsbori1ni9wih5

----

Content:

Looking for a simple way to train strength, power, and balance? The trap bar delivers. Also known as a hex bar, this tool is beginner-friendly and effective for lifters of all levels.

Trap bar exercises let the body move in a more natural path, reducing joint stress while targeting major muscle groups.

From deadlifts to carries, they build serious full-body strength. Research outlined in an article by Stronger by Science shows that trap bar deadlifts allow for higher velocity, greater power output, and are often safer and easier to learn than conventional barbell deadlifts.

This guide breaks down the top 16 trap bar movements to add to any routine, whether the goal is to lift heavier, move better, or stay injury-free.

What is a Trap Bar (AKA – Hex Bar)?
A trap bar, also known as a hex bar, is a six-sided weightlifting bar that lets the lifter stand inside the frame during exercises.

Unlike a straight barbell, it positions the weight at the sides of the body. This creates a more even load and makes lifting feel more natural—especially during movements like the hex bar deadlift, which offers a safer alternative to traditional deadlifts for many lifters.

The trap bar’s design helps reduce pressure on the lower back, shoulders, and wrists. That makes it a smart option for beginners, people with joint issues, or anyone focusing on form and safety.

Most trap bars come with two sets of handles—one higher and one lower—so lifters can change grip positions based on their goals.

Introduced in the 1980s by powerlifter Al Gerard, the trap bar was designed to make deadlifting safer and more accessible. Since then, the trap bar has become a gym favorite for building strength with less strain on the body.

Benefits of Using a Trap Bar
The trap bar isn’t just a niche piece of equipment—it’s a game-changer for lifters of all levels. Its unique design opens the door to safer, more effective strength training.

Here’s why it deserves a spot in your routine.

Better form with less stress: The trap bar places the weight at the sides of the body instead of in front. This helps keep the spine in a more neutral position, making it easier to maintain good form.
Reduces lower back strain: Research published in the Journal of Strength and Conditioning Research suggests that with the weight centered, there’s less forward pull on the spine—meaning less pressure on the lower back compared to traditional barbell lifts like deadlifts.
Beginner-friendly and joint-safe: The neutral grip handles put less stress on the shoulders, wrists, and elbows. It’s a great option for beginners or anyone recovering from an injury.
Builds full-body strength: Trap bar lifts target the legs, glutes, back, core, and grip. That makes it a powerful tool for total-body training.
Great for athletes and advanced lifters: The trap bar allows for heavy lifting with a reduced injury risk. It’s perfect for training explosive power, especially in moves like jumps or loaded carries.
A study from the Sports journal found that the trap bar deadlift leads to greater speed, power, and total work than the conventional deadlift. It also keeps the body accelerating for longer, helping one build serious strength.

Whether starting out or leveling up, the trap bar brings serious value to strength training. It’s versatile, safe, and effective across fitness levels.

16 Best Trap Bar Exercises
A trap bar workout doesn’t just build strength—it builds smarter strength. From squats to carries, it helps reduce joint strain while boosting performance. Whether training for muscle, power, or stability, these exercises get results across all fitness levels.

1. Trap Bar Deadlift
Step into the bar, stand tall with feet hip-width apart, and grip the handles firmly. Keep your chest up, back flat, and core engaged. The neutral grip keeps the load centered, which helps reduce strain on the lower back.

Push through the floor and finish tall with glutes locked in. It’s one of the most effective lifts for building total-body strength while keeping form simple and safe.

According to research published in BMC Sports Science, Medicine and Rehabilitation, recreationally active females who trained with trap bar deadlifts twice a week for eight weeks significantly improved lower-body strength, power, and lean mass.

2. Trap Bar Squat
Stand inside the trap bar and grip the higher handles. Keep your chest up, back flat, and core engaged as you squat straight down.

This squat variation allows for a more upright torso and less forward lean with a solid core engagement. A great way to train the legs without the added pressure of a back-loaded barbell. It’s ideal for beginners learning squat mechanics and lifters recovering from back strain.

3. Trap Bar Push-Up
Grip the handles and lower into a push-up. Because the handles are slightly elevated, you can lower your chest deeper than in a standard push-up, which increases range of motion and muscle activation.

The neutral grip puts less stress on the wrists and shoulders. Adding bumper plates increases the stability challenge, making this a great option for building control and upper-body strength.

4. Trap Bar Shrug
Stand tall inside the trap bar with a heavy load. Grip the handles, brace your core, and let your arms hang naturally. Hold heavy, shrug your shoulders high, and pause briefly at the top.

The trap bar makes it easier to go heavier than dumbbells while supporting better shoulder alignment. This move strengthens the upper traps and improves posture, especially for lifters looking to carry over benefits to deadlifts.

5. Trap Bar Suitcase Carry
Pick up the bar on one side and walk forward with control. This creates an offset load that challenges the core to stay upright and resist leaning. It targets grip strength, core stability, and posture—one step at a time.

Research from the National Strength and Conditioning Association suggests that loaded carries, such as the suitcase carry, enhance hip and trunk stability, contributing to improved muscular function and injury prevention.​

6. Trap Bar Inverted Row
Set the trap bar securely in a rack and pull from underneath. Adjust the bar to about waist height, then lie beneath it with your chest lined up under the handles and your heels planted firmly.

This motion trains the upper back with less stress on the joints thanks to the neutral grip. It builds pulling power and helps reinforce strong scapular control, crucial for shoulder health.

7. Trap Bar Romanian Deadlift
Hinge at the hips and lower the bar while keeping the spine neutral and a slight bend in the knees. Lower only as far as you can maintain good form, typically to just below the knees or mid-shin. Focus on stretching the hamstrings and loading the glutes.

Squeeze the glutes at the top to finish each rep. This movement strengthens the posterior chain and improves hip mobility, a key factor in athletic performance.

8. Elevated Trap Bar Squat
Stand on bumper plates inside the trap bar to increase squat depth. Keep your torso upright and core tight as you lower down.

This variation targets the quads more directly while keeping tension off the spine and shoulders. It’s an efficient way to push leg development while keeping the movement joint-friendly.

9. Trap Bar Jump Squat
Hold the trap bar with about 20% of your bodyweight. Lower into a squat, then jump explosively, and land softly. Keep the chest up and knees slightly bent on landing.

This is a powerful move for building speed, power, and lower body control without loading the spine. Great for athletes looking to improve vertical jump performance and dynamic strength.

10. Trap Bar Floor Press
Lie flat on the floor with the trap bar placed above you on blocks or safety bars. Grip the neutral handles and press the bar from the floor, stopping when your upper arms contact the ground.

The limited range helps build lockout strength by targeting the triceps and upper chest. The neutral grip supports joint-friendly pressing. It’s a smart choice for lifters who want to go heavy while minimizing joint strain.

11. Trap Bar Rack Pull
Start with the bar set just below the knees. Stand inside, grip the handles, and pull to full extension by driving through the hips and locking out at the top.

This variation is great for building upper back strength and improving deadlift lockout mechanics. It also builds grip endurance and reduces the range of motion, making it easier to lift heavier loads with control.

12. Trap Bar Figure-8 Carry
Grip the handles and carry the loaded trap bar while walking in a figure-eight pattern. Keep your torso upright and your steps steady throughout the movement.

This move challenges grip, posture, and coordination in motion—especially in tight spaces. The turning pattern also forces the core to stabilize through rotation, improving athletic balance, control, and strength.

13. Trap Bar Elevated Split Squat
Stand inside the trap bar and place your back foot on a bench behind you. Grip the handles, lower into a split squat, and drive through the front heel to return to standing.

This unilateral movement targets one leg at a time and forces good form with every rep. The trap bar placement keeps the center of gravity tight, which helps to keep one’s form stable and prevent tipping.

14. Trap Bar Single-Leg Deadlift
Stand inside the trap bar and shift your weight onto one leg, keeping the back leg slightly behind for balance. Hinge at the hips while keeping your back flat and core tight throughout the movement. Lower the bar with control until your torso is nearly parallel to the floor, then drive through the front heel to stand tall.

This move builds strength through the hamstrings and glutes while training balance and control. The trap bar keeps the load centered, making it more stable than using dumbbells or a barbell. It’s a smart way to address left-right imbalances and build single-leg power.

15. Trap Bar Tall-Kneeling Shoulder Press
Start in a tall-kneeling position inside the trap bar with knees hip-width apart and toes flat. Grip the neutral handles, brace your core, and keep your glutes engaged to stabilize the hips. Press the bar overhead in a straight line, locking out at the top without arching the lower back.

This variation eliminates momentum from the lower body, forcing the core to work harder and building strict pressing strength. The tall-kneeling setup also reinforces proper posture and pelvic control, making it a valuable tool for developing overhead power and total-body stability.

16. Trap Bar Staggered-Stance Deadlift
Stand inside the trap bar with your feet about hip-width apart, then step one foot slightly back. Keep both feet flat and a soft bend in the back knee. Brace your core, hinge at the hips, and grip the neutral handles. Most of the body weight should stay over the front leg as you drive through the heel to lift, keeping your spine neutral and shoulders engaged.

This variation helps reduce strain on the lower back while building unilateral strength and control. It’s especially effective for addressing imbalances and preparing the body for single-leg deadlifts or rehab-focused training.

Sample Trap Bar Workout Routine
This full-body trap bar workout hits all the major muscle groups and is designed to build strength, boost endurance, and improve total-body performance. The routine combines compound movements that challenge the legs, glutes, back, shoulders, and core in one session.

Train two to three times per week with at least one rest day in between for recovery.

Start with light cardio followed by dynamic stretches like leg swings, arm circles, and bodyweight lunges. This warms up the muscles, improves joint mobility, and prepares the body for heavy lifting.

----

Website: 

----

Uuid: ppsr4j3dbmwzd1in